HUMAN RESOURCE POLICY
INTRODUCTION
Human resource policies are continuing guidelines on the approach of which an
organization  intends to adopt in managing its people. They represent specific guidelines to
HR managers  on various matters concerning employment and state the intent of the
organization on  different aspects of Human Resource management such as recruitment,
promotion,  compensation, training, selections etc. They therefore serve as a reference point
when  human resources management practices are being developed or when decisions are
being  made about an organization's workforce.
A good HR policy provides generalized guidance on the approach adopted by the
organization, and therefore its employees, concerning various aspects of employment. A
procedure spells out precisely what action should be taken in line with the policies..
The policy is rules of conduct, therefore it is based on the following
principles: a) Place right person in the right place at the right time.
b) Train every employee for current and future jobs.
c) Establish organization as whole a co-ordination team.
d) Ensure proper and adequate supply of tools and equipment.
e) Create better working conditions
f) Give security with opportunity, incentive, and recognition.
g) Look forward, plan ahead for more and better things.
OBJECTIVE
The Objective of the Human Resource policy is to provide support to its employees through:
a) Continuity and consistency of Service.
b) Better Communication, Internal & External,
c) Enhancing Orientation & Focus.
d) Mentoring reference.
EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS
An employment Contract is an accord that states the working relationship between an
employee and a company. It allows both parties to understand the rules and regulations and
the terms of employment.
It is important to have these documents as the Indian employment laws are a diverse and
complex framework to navigate. Therefore, having up to date documents to prove the
company’s compliances will protect the company for several years ahead.
A few important laws that you must refer to before creating the company’s employment
contracts are wage laws, labour laws, the contract act, 1872 and the local state’s
employment  laws.
CODE OF CONDUCT
The code of conduct policy of a company contains the vision, ethics and mission of the
organization and also It is created to build and maintain the right business environment for
employees. It contains the rules of work that the employees of the company much abide by.
In India, policies such as equal right policies, electronic usage policy, dress code, enabling
work environments, media policy, conflict of interest, etc. are included in the code of
conduct  policy.
Furthermore, the code of conduct must include the procedure to report a breach of the code
of conduct.
EMPLOYEE WAGES
Managing employee payroll is an important part of an HR department’s job, however,
ensuring that employee salaries are competitive in the market and are compliant with
government policies is also an important part of it.
In India, several acts cover the wages of an employee. One of them is the Minimum wage act,
1948 and also It sets the minimum wages that a skilled and unskilled laborer should receive.
As well as it enables employees to earn the ‘basic cost of living’.
Furthermore, the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 ensures that the employee receives the right
monthly payment on time and without any unnecessary deductions.
Therefore, it may be tempting to only focus on the competitive market rates, however, it is
important to pay heed to the compliances required for every employee’s wages. At Rikalp
we follow all the statutory norms including employee provident fund, employee  state
insurance of the eligible employees.
LEAVE POLICY
The leave policy is created to give employees a clear picture of the number of leaves an
employee is allowed to take annually. Furthermore, it should also mention public holidays.
Furthermore, the leave policy must also mention the percentage of salary cut that an
employee will see in the case of unpaid leaves or half-days. All regular employees are
entitled  for 18 Earned Leaves in a calendar year. However, if the employee has joined the
organization in the middle of the calendar year, then the quantum of Earned Leaves will be
pro rata basis.
In case of new joiners/employee transfer, following rules of leave credit will be applicable:
a) Employee joining/transferred before or on 10th of the month: 1.5 Leaves
b) Employee joining/transferred between 11th to 18th of the month: 1 Leave
c) Employee joining/transferred after 20th of the month: No Credit
d) We give 0.5 leave to the employee on his birthday.
e) For Initial Three Months No Paid Leave will be allowed.
f) In a Notice Period No Leave allow.
g) All leaves shall be calculated from date of joining of the employee.
h) The maximum period of casual leave which a staff is allowed to avail is 12 days
in calendar year subject to a maximum of 3 days at a time, normally. The limit of
3 days at a time may be relaxed in special circumstances at the discretion of the
HR Department.
i) In case any staff remains absent from duty for more than 5 days without any
intimation to the concerned authorities his/her contract is liable to be
terminated by the concerned authority.
All Leaves will be credited to the concerned at the beginning of each year, and the leaves
remaining at the end of the year will automatically lapse. We have carrying forward leaves  to
next year limits of 6 Leaves and Encashment to other leave balance for employees. Legally,
India has three national holidays where no organization is allowed to be open without
permission. However, organizations like factories, hospitals, travel agencies, etc. are exempt
from this and are allowed to work for 24 hours a day. However, under the Factories Act, 1948,
they must be paid for those days and should be paid for overtime.
S. No.
Holiday
Date
Day
1
Independence Day
15-Aug 24
Thursday
2
Mahatma Gandhi’s Birthday
02-Oct 24
Wednesday
3
Dussehra
12-Oct 24
Saturday
4
Diwali
31-Oct 24
Thursday
5
Govardhan Puja
02-Nov 24
Saturday
6
Bhai Duj
03-Nov 24
Sunday
7
New Year's Day
01-Jan 25
Wednesday
8
Republic Day
26-Jan 25
Sunday
9
Holi
14-Mar 25
Friday
OFFICE MANAGEMENT
Addresses of staff
A list of the addresses of all staff members, including their contact numbers, working in
office/section is maintained in the Office/Section.
Office Premises
When leaving office, every member of the staff should see that all files, papers, books,
registers, etc. in his charge are kept in proper places. (As far as possible in locked Almirahs)
pending paper should be kept together in a separate folder appropriately marked.
It shall be the duty of every staff member to see that the personal computers, A/Cs, lights,
fans etc. are used only when necessary and that they are switched off when not required
during office hours and also every evening before leaving the office.
The telephone provided in the Office is used strictly for official calls under no
circumstances;  the telephone should not be used for private calls except in cases of
emergency.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
Every organization must take extra steps to make their workplace a safe environment for
women to work in. It isn’t just a legal requirement but also a moral obligation. In India, laws
have also been updated to make the safety of women in workplaces a priority.
. The act is well praised and has even lead to closing down of a few companies. Furthermore,
the act protects not just the employees and interns of an organization but also any woman
visiting the company or a woman customer. Every organization must include a sexual
harassment policy to be able to address all complaints actively.
We at Rikalp Capital Private Limited created a separate policy for this in detailed manner.
MATERNITY AND PATERNITY LEAVE POLICY
Every organization employing more than 10 workers is required to follow the maternity
benefits (amendment) act, 2017. The maternity act is perhaps one of the most popular HR
policies in India Also, It outlines the benefits and the leaves that a pregnant woman who has
worked in an organization for as per law entitled to.
a) Female Employee with over one-year continuous service shall be entitled to 26 weeks
maternity leave subject to production of medical certificate being their pregnant and
the probable date of confinement. Not with standing anything the same female
employee may be allowed to combine any other kind of leave subject to availability
of leave title along with the maternity leave provided that the total leave so availed
does not exceed 60 days. Maternity leave shall be leave on full pay together with any
other allowance that may be admissible.
b) Employee who are covered under ESIC the maternity leave will be provided by the
ESIC.
TERMINATION AND SEPARATION POLICY
A Termination and Separation Policy is a crucial HR guideline outlining the procedures for
ending an employee’s tenure, whether due to resignation, retirement, or involuntary
termination. This policy ensures fair, consistent, and legally compliant separations, covering
aspects like notice periods, exit interviews, property returns, final pay, and data handling. It
is
essential
to
safeguard
the
company’s
interests
and
maintain
a
positive
employer-employee  relationship during separations.
ATTENDANCE
1. Working Days
a) The working days of the company for all employees will be from Monday to Saturday.
The timings would be as under.
Days/Timings: Monday to Saturday
Time In: - 9:30 am
Time Out: - 6:00 pm
b) Employees have to ensure that the assigned tasks are completed before availing leave.
c) Depending on the demands of the job role and exigencies of work, the employee
maybe required to work extra hours at office to complete the assigned tasks or work  in
a different shift subject to approval from the reporting authority/management. d)
Depending on the work load, Weekly off’s on Sunday can be cancelled by the
Management on its own discretion.
2. Weekly Offs
a) Sunday of the month will be the weekly off
b) Owing to work exigencies, an employee on an exceptional basis may be expected to
work either on a weekly off or on a public holiday.
c) In our company, 2nd Saturday is off every month.
3. Lunch Hours
Company allows for one hour of lunch break in the day.
Such lunch break could be taken anytime between 1:00 pm and 2:00 pm on a staggered
schedule so that an employee’s absence does not create a problem for peers or
colleagues.
4. Attendance Guidelines
a) All employees are required to mark their attendance on Bio Matric located in the
reception area in the morning and evening as they walk in and walkout. Failure of
doing so, might result into an absent marked for the employee for that particular day.
b) The branch office would maintain an attendance register to record the attendance of
employees.
c) At the end of the month, HR Department would prepare a consolidated attendance
listing of all employees along with their attendance record and forward it to
Management & Accounts Department.
d) Employees must refrain from manipulation/falsification of attendance records
including proxy attendance. Employees may face strict disciplinary action if found
guilty.
e) In our organization for Field employees / branches attendance records will be allow
in Lystloc Mobile Tracking app.
f) Attendance record is maintained in a manner that the record remains authenticated
and unquestionable.
g) Attendance registers is maintained at the establishment section. h) Every member of
the staff should, on arrival, enter in register clearly his initials  against his name in the
relevant dated column. At 9.45 a.m. and the register should be
sent to the Director. Any person arriving thereafter should mark his/her attendance
in the register in the Director’s room.
i) Every member of the staff is expected to be in his seat and to start work by 9.30 a.m.,
unless he has previously obtained special permission for late attendance. j) Similarly
leaving the office early will be only with the due permission of the relevant  Reporting
Manager will be allowed in exceptional cases of emergencies only.
5. Late arrivals / Flexibility to come late
Employees are required to arrive by 9:30 am However, a flexi-entry between 9:00 am
will be allowed only two time in a month with the intention of 9 hours to be clocked  in
for the day. Failing so will be treated as absence to work and deemed as half day of
absence to work. Repeated default will be considered as indiscipline and can lead to strict
disciplinary action from the management.
6. Absence from office
a) Any employee, who is outside the office during working hours, should ensure that
his/her immediate reporting authority and HR Department are aware of his/her
whereabouts and the nature of work assigned.
b) Unauthorized absence form office or absence from office without prior approval from
the immediate reporting authority will be considered as indiscipline and will be dealt
with accordingly.
ADAPTIVE WORK CULTURE POLICY
Work offices look a little different than they used to a few years ago. Today, more and more
employees seek for flexible work options such as work from home options or 6 days work
weeks.
Though it is not a legal requirement to adapt to the changing times, it isn’t smart to stick to
the traditional work patterns either. Having adaptive work cultures helps employees be
more productive as well as improves employee engagement. This is an HR policy in India
that is often overlooked, however, it is included in Rikalp Capital Private Limited’sHR policy.
WHISTLEBLOWER POLICY
A Whistleblower Policy is an essential component of any HR strategy. This policy provides a
safe and confidential channel for employees to report unethical behavior, misconduct, or
wrongdoing without fear of retaliation. Encouraging transparency and accountability
upholds ethical standards, and promotes a workplace that values integrity. This policy
demonstrates the organization’s commitment to promoting a culture of honesty, trust, and
responsibility.
As we all know that Rikalp Capital is a transparent and ethical values-based organization
where any kind of unethical or suspicious activity is not ignored at any cost.
Rikalp Capital believes in conducting its business, dealings and affairs in a fair and
transparent manner by adopting the highest standards of professionalism, integrity and
ethical behavior. Any actual or potential unethical or suspicious activity is of serious
concern  to Rikalp Capital Pvt. Ltd.
The “Whistle Blower Policy” has been put in place to ensure that alleged serious matters are
investigated impartially and promptly while maintaining confidentiality of the identity of
the  person disclosing the matter. For the safety of the person giving information about the
matter, his identity is kept completely confidential.
A whistleblower is a person who exposes issues related to injustice in an organization or
among people. Usually this person is a member of the same organization.
Unethical and suspicious actions can be as follows: -
a. Fraud or corruption
b. Financial misconduct
c. Violation of laws, rules, regulations
d. Direct threats to public interests such as fraud, security breaches and
corruption
e. Failure to comply with legal requirements or company policy
f. Improper conduct or unethical behavior
g. Attempt to conceal any material fact
h. Negligence which creates any general or specific danger to the public health i.
Any illegal act whether criminal/civil, Manipulation of Company data /  records
j. Collusion with third parties/associates to exploit the company
k. Breach of terms and conditions of employment and rules thereof and;
l. Any action which is likely to tarnish the image of the institution
m. Taking or attempting to take bribe or bribe or attempting to give it to anyone
in the organization
n. Any act which harms someone's personal honors
o. Disobeying company policy or code of conduct
Any internal or external person may report any unethical or suspected criminal activity
mentioned above confidentially first of fall share with your reporting manager then share to
HR Department in case of your issue not solved then share with our Vigilance Officer.
Customers
with
grievance
related to
loan or against  staff can
contact to:
BRANCH MANAGER/
REPORTING MANAGER
BM Name / Reporting
Manager Name:
Call
will
be
taken
between
09:30 am to
6:00 pm only
On all
working days
If
the
complaint
/
dispute  in not redressed
within a period of 15
days, the  customer may
approach to  second HR
Department as  under:
HR Department
If
the
complaint
/
dispute  in not redressed
within a  period of one
month, the
customer
may approach to  the our
Vigilance Officer  Email
Id as under:
GROOMING & DRESS CODE POLICY
Gooming and Dress code guidelines articulated below have been developed in order to
foster a professional environment in value and culture. It shall be applicable to all
employees.
The dress code policy exists to make working more professional (formal wear) and also,
promote a better work environment. But, a good dress code policy is a set of guidelines to
understand what is appropriate to be worn at work. Having a laid out policy ensures that
the employees are well-dressed for meetings and promotes the right work culture.
Monday to Friday: When in office, or in business engagements outside office, the following
attire is expected.
Smart business formals, formal meeting invitations shall include dress code guidance.
Saturday: In addition to above, one can also choose to wear smart casuals with matching
footwear and on festive, one can choose ethnic wear as well.
When in office, or in business engageents outside office, the employees are expected not to
wear clothing with printed message, slogan, or political message, picture or art depicting
drugs, alcohol, smoking, weapons, violence, or that is obscene or disrespectful or having
sexual connotations, tops & blouses that are sleeveless, backless, strapless, or have spaghetti
straps, sleeveless shirts & kurtas, excessive visible body piercing or tattoos, short-skirts
ending above the knees, shorts, Bermuda pants, capris, flip-flops, round neck T-shirts, body
hugging clothes, neon colored or faded or frayed clothes etc. or any other sartorial
inappropriateness as decided by the management.
PROBATION AND CONFIRMATION POLICY
When a new employee is on board they are usually kept on a probation period. Which
commonly lasts for six months. It gives the company time to judge an employee’s
performance and also the conditions under which the employee will be confirmed into the
company. Probation periods are mandatory for all employees of an organization. Therefore,
this means that the employee gets a chance to understand the work environment and the
workload of a company.
The policy must include the probation time period, as well as procedures, post the
confirmation also, it should include the code of conduct, the performance expectations and
goals of the employee for the company.
WORK FROM HOME POLICY
A Work from the Home policy is an agreement between an employer and employee to
grant the employee the privilege of working from home. It should clearly specify the work
timings, deliverables and clear procedures. Though there are no laws regarding these,
having a clear and definitive policy will be helpful. It must include the procedure through
which an employee can apply for the privilege of working from home and mention in detail
who is eligible for sure privileges.
GRIEVANCE POLICY
In India, as per section 9C of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 every employer employing
at least 20 workmen, is required to set up a Grievance Redressal Committee. Grievance
regarding job harassment, sexual misconduct, unfair decisions, and more should be heard,
and should have the policy to resolve the same. Meanwhile, HR policies such as the
grievance policy are extremely important for the growth and proper functioning of an
organization. A grievance is a complaint raised by the employee to the management
regarding dissatisfaction towards work environment, economic reason, HR policy, lack of
work satisfaction, overworked or exhaustion, getting along with peers, etc.
Similar general processes for addressing grievances in the workplace. a) Informal
meeting with supervisor. Before filing a grievance, encourage employees to talk with
their managers.
b) Formal grievance in writing.
c) Evaluate the grievance.
d) Conduct a formal investigation.
e) Resolution.
We at Rikalp Capital Private Limited created Grievence Redressal Policy in detailed manner.
AWARDS AND RECOGNITION POLICY
The rewards and Recognition Policy is created to give employees a one-time reward or an
award for outstanding performance. It is created to help encourage employees to improve
their performance whether individually or as a team. The awards and also recognition
milestones are built according to the overarching company vision and objective. The reward
can be both monetary and non-monetary.
DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY DESCRIPTION
An important policy for any workplace is the Drug and Alcohol Policy. This policy provides
guidelines for employee conduct regarding substance use during work hours and on
company premises. Its aim is to maintain a safe and productive workplace while addressing
substance-related issues through testing, consequences for policy violations, and
confidential support mechanisms.
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT AND APPRAISAL
The performance management policy is one of the HR policies created to give employees a
clear understanding of what is expected of them. It provides an appropriate framework
within which the performance of an employee can be managed. Also, this can be done
through the implementation of various tools, techniques, as well as processes.
While performance management includes identifying, measuring, managing, and
developing the performance of human resources in an organization. Performance appraisal
is an ongoing process of evaluating an employee’s performance and therefore, should be a
part monthly HR processes.
RECRUITMENT AND HIRING POLICY
Having a Recruitment and Hiring Policy is crucial for any HR department as it sets out the
fundamental guidelines for employees involved in the hiring process. These policies cover
various aspects such as recruiting and interviewing candidates to making final hiring
decisions and ensuring that the hiring practices are both effective and compliant with
regulations. These policies can be customize to fit the specific needs of each company,
making them flexible and adaptable to ensure consistency in the hiring process.
TRAVEL POLICY
In the necessary requirement of an employee being required to travel for business-related
work, the travel policy is created. Also, this reimburses the cost of the travel to the
employee for business approved travel costs. The travel policy must mention the
requirements for proof, the procedure of filing for reimbursement, authorization authority
as well as the exceptions to it.
Outstation Tour, Travel & Conveyance Policy
Travel Eligibility Slab:
Hotel Stay
eligibility
Food
Allowances
(Per Day)
Same
Day
(Actual)
Slab
Max. -Travel mode
eligibility/ City
Tie
r-1
Tie
r-2
Tie
r-3
Tier
-1
Tier
-2
Tier
-3
Return
DA  #
Slab
-1
0
1st AC train /AV Volvo Bus/
Personal Car/ Cab**
325
0
215
0
170
0
106
0
960
760
380
Slab
-9
1st AC train /AV Volvo Bus/
Personal Car/ Cab**
245
0
155
0
130
0
880
800
640
300
Slab
-8
2nd AC train /AV Volvo
Bus/  Personal Car/ Cab**
205
0
125
0
110
0
780
710
560
270
Slab
-6
3rd AC / AC Bus / Bike /
Personal Car */ Auto**
145
0
950  850  610
550
430
210
Slab
-5
3rd AC / AC Bus / Bike /
Personal Car */ Auto**
125
0
850  750  590
530
420
190
Slab
-4
Sleeper / Non-AC Bus /
Bike/  Public Transport
115
0
750  650  550
490
390
180
Slab
-3
Sleeper / Non-AC Bus /
Bike/  Public Transport
110
0
700  600  510
460
360
170
Slab
-2
Sleeper / Non-AC Bus /
Bike/  Public Transport
105
0
650  550  480
430
330
160
Slab
-1
Sleeper / Non-AC Bus /
Bike/  Public Transport
100
0
600  500  450
400
300
150
* With Prior approval from HOD & HR, Dining Allowance is allowed in case an employee
doesn't stay at Hotel during an out-station pre-aproved tour.
*Same Day Allowance: Applicable only for Travel outside the Purview Area subject to no
any other expenses apart from the travelling.
*Cab Applicable for local travel like Hotel to Company Office, Railway Station to Hotel etc.
or Local Visit during the tour/ travel.
Slab Mapping
Slab
Sales/ Business
Collection & Credit
Other Departments
Slab-10
BH
CH
SVP/ HOD
Slab-9
SH
SCM
DVP/ HOD
Slab-8
CSM
CCM
CM/ HOD
Slab-7
SBM
CM/ Sr. CM
Sr. Manager
Slab-6
BM
ACM
---
Slab-5
SM
TL
Manager
Slab-4
SRM
SCO/SCE
DM
Slab-3
---
---
AM/ TL
Slab-2
RM
CO/CE
Sr. Exe
Slab-1
RO/Jr. RO
Jr. CO/ CE
Exe/ Jr. Exe
Type of
Allowance
Reimbursement Limit
Personal Car
Allowance
INR 6/KM-Petrol OR Diesel (Applicable for Slab 07th onwards)
Bike allowance
INR 3/KM (Applicable for Slab 01st to 06th)
AMENDEMENT OF THE POLICY
The Board of Directors on its own and/or on the recommendation of the top management
can amend this policy as and when required deemed fit. Any or all provisions of this Policy
would be subjected to revision/amendment in accordance with the regulations on the
subject as may be issued from relevant statutory authorities, from time to time.
REVIEW
The Policy is flexible and easy to understand and comply with by all levels of employees.
The  Board should review this Policy periodically but at least once in a year, so that it
remains  appropriate in the light of material changes in regulatory requirement with respect
to the  Company’s size, complexity, geographic reach, business strategy, market and best
governance practices. The policy can also be reviewed as and when deemed necessary by
the  Top Management and amendments effected to the same, subject to approval of the
Board if  any, and when practical difficulties are encountered. The Top management may
also review  the policy on document retention to comply with any local, state, central
legislation that may  be broadcast from time to time